For the date when those men were killed? You're
saying there were some men killed? Yes, they got
killed at Texas Coal Mine. Yes, sir. How were they
killed? Well, they say, you know, there was two
mains of coal. One, the top main and the bottom
main. And this elevator goes down to the bottom, of
course. All right. And they claim... Because I was
a communist, they had to get some way to excuse.
They said that this man came out of the second vein,
and he must have stuck his head here when the
elevator was going down, and he knocked him down to
the bottom and killed him. I see. So the elevator
knocked him down to the bottom of the shaft, and
that killed him? Uh-huh. So one man died in that
accident? One man died in that accident, yeah.
Were there any other accidents that you remember?
Well,
Jose Rios was his name. He got killed that way. Who
was it? Jose. Jose? Jose Rios. Rios? Rios. Rios.
R-I-O-S? R-I-O-S. Rios. Yes, sir. Jose Rios. Joe
Rios. And... I don't remember what year it was.
No, I don't remember. It was in the 20s, but I don't
remember what year it was.
Do you remember what was the basic food that the
Mexican families ate, minors?
Beans, I guess. Beans? Beans. Beans and potatoes,
harsh potatoes. Harsh potatoes, beans, and rice,
and such stuff as that. Where did the miners get the
food? At the commissary. At the commissary. Yes.
Yeah, they kept the stuff there at the commissary.
Did they pay cash for that food, or did they just
keep it on the books? No, they kept it on the books.
And subtracted from the pay? Every two weeks, they
said, well, Augustine's got so much coming. All
right. How about his bills? Well, he's got a lot of
bills here. Says Augustine's got $45 coming for
two weeks or half a month. And he bought the
grocers. $30 was the grocers. So he's got $50 left.
And that's the way it was. He'd take home. No, the
house rent come off of that. Did you, most of the
time on payday, get some form of cash? Yeah, a
little cash was. Well, were there any miners that
were always in debt? Oh, yes, lots of them. Lots of
them. Never see the dime. I see. Yeah, lots of them.
No, it's just lots of them. Why was that? If there
you were getting... getting money every payday,
and yet they seem to be in debt. What was the
difference between you and them? Well, you see, I
was getting $90 a month, straight time. I see.
While they had the coal digger, he had to go in, and
what he, well, he got four acres, 25 cents a car, a
ton. 25 cents a car. Uh-huh. If he loads four cars,
he made $1. And maybe he walked a day, and maybe he
put it to do, and he just left one car or two cars. So
how much will it be in a week? Not very much. No.
That's why they're staying dead. They don't know
how to. I always been pretty careful myself. If I
got a dollar in my pocket, I ain't going to spend a
whole dollar, no, sir. I'm going to keep 50 cents in
my pocket and spend 50 cents. I don't know what
might happen tomorrow. I tell you, I went through
this year of depression. And I mean, I know what
that is. Yes, sir. What did you do during the
depression? Well, I had to go back for work, and I
worked 35 cents a day, cleaning toilets, whatever
I could get. You see, I had a family to support. And I
had work, and I had work for whatever I could get. I
never had what kind of work. or how much you're
going to pay me. All I want is to wait. When I got
through that period, why didn't they want to? And I
was glad to get that. I was doing it the first year.
You need some water?
No, thanks. You see, I had a stroke last September,
and I kind of faked my throat, this whole side, my
left side. This stroke got me. That's the reason I
got that walk I keep. Can't put the weight on this
one. It goes to shaking. Would you like to rest a few
minutes? No, that's all right. I'm ready. I'm set.
Yeah, it's all right. Okay. All right. What did the
women do during the day? Who? What did the women do
during the day? Stayed home. Stayed home? Stayed
home. Stayed around or what? Just. Well, those
that had children, I guess they stayed busy with
the kids. See, they used to wash, they didn't have
to wash in machines then. They had a tub and
washboard. They had to wash on this washboard.
They had no hot water heaters. They had a kettle.
Kettle? Yeah, kettle. They had to heat the water,
boiling water. And they stayed busy washing and
cleaning up children. I guess. I don't know. I was
at my work. I didn't know what the women do much. I
know they didn't go around because they had no
automobiles. Very few had a horse and buggy. Very
few. I was lucky to have a horse and buggy. Well,
that's a good problem because you saved your
money. I had a horse and buggy. Yes, I had one. A
pretty little mare. Gray mare. She was one of them.
What do you call that? Peas? Yeah,
I
lost my voice since I had this stroke.
You were 15 when you went into the mine. Yeah,
right, yes. Did you know of anybody that was
younger than that and was working in the mines? No,
no. 15 was about the youngest. About the youngest.
I don't remember any kids went down to mine besides
me. Was it mostly the Mexican workers? Yes, yeah,
most of them. Most of them, mostly, yeah. Did they
all seem to get along with each other? Oh, yes, yes,
they got along fine. Except for Saturday nights at
the dentist, when they got drunk, they had fights.
That was on the Texas Coal Company property,
right? Yes, yes. Yeah, I guess the waitress at
Johnson had the same trouble, I guess. I never did
go around. I always stayed at my place.
Were there any other accidents like boiler
explosions or anything like that? No, no. Do you
think mining was fairly safe there? Well, I think
so. It was about as safe as they could have it. Well,
let me ask you this. From the time that you had your
accident until the time that you quit, did you see
an improvement in the mining techniques? No, sir.
None at all. Not at all. And I used to drive up and
down this road and into the camps, take those
people to town and bring them back. I never did it
anymore,
no. So they used mainly steam power and mule power.
Yes. Steam, the mules would start to pull the, you
see those anchories, they call it, they dig it all,
half a mile long, and they'd have so many feet,
they'd run what they call rooms one other way, and
go so far away, they had to run back this other way.
They had to leave big, thick pillars to support,
you know. And these mules go over there and pull the
cars from the end of the track like railroad, from
the diggers to the cage. And then they put it on this
cage. We call it a cage. It's like an elevator. They
give me a signal. Then I hushed it up. And they had a
tipple. I hushed it into the tipple. One cage goes
down, one come up. If the car goes down, one load
comes up. And it comes up to the tipple? Over the
tipple, they had what they called a dumper. One man
out there. This dumper would pull that car off the
cage and dump it. Then they had to shoot that coal
right into the railroad car. Right into the
railroad. Right into the railroad car. Was there
any dirt mixed in with the coal? Well, in some
places they had little strips of dirt, but the
dingo was supposed to throw that on the side. Then
when he had enough to fill up a car, he'd fill up a car
in dirt. He'd get so much for that. About ten cents,
I think, he'd give a dime to load that car in dirt.
Okay, well, how did you keep the number of cars per
day? I mean, how did each miner know how many cars?
Well, you see, each miner had his number. He had a
number. He had a number, yeah, a bunch of checks.
Washers, brass washers, they had their number on.
For instance, I was number, say I was number 12. My
check was on marked number 12. You was 14. Your
check was on 14. Every time you load a car, you put
that check on there. So when it comes to the top,
that dump truck pulls that check off and hangs it on
the board. All the 14s belongs to one man. All the
12s belongs to another man. In that way. How many of
these brass washers on the average? Hundreds of
them. Hundreds of them. How many a day for one miner
on the average? Well, they said they might give
you, well, you wouldn't load over eight or nine
cars a day. They said they might give you 12 or 15
checks. Might give you 15 of these washers. And you
keep them, you keep them so. So this dumper, at good
times, he comes out with a boat, has days on it. And
each day has his watches at that. Number 12, number
10, number six, and number, everyone number now.
And of course, at the store, they knew my name, they
know what was my number there. And you number, and
all the rest of them. And the dumper would come down
with them checks and turn it over to the engineer,
turn it over to me. So after I quit my agent work, I
had to go and count these checks. I'd count all
these checks. Then I'd call the office. Then I'd
call Mr. Shrimp at the office and I'd tell him,
number 14, 12, 12 checks, 12 cars. Number
so-and-so, ten. Number so-and-so, six. Just how
do you know it? He'd put it on the book. So you call
him on the telephone? Over the telephone from the
engine room to the office over there. And the
office was at the mine? Yeah, at the store. Well,
Augustine, did anybody ever dispute your county?
Were there ever any arguments? Yeah, sometimes
mistakes. Sometimes... The mistakes, maybe the
double might drop a check. Or maybe they put two
checks on one. And how were those disputes
resolved? Well, whatever the stripper said,
whatever the boss said, that's not so. You may say,
Mr. Stripper, I'm too cautious. That's what the
book shows. You can't pay for the book shows.
That's all. There was no use to argue with them. No
use to argue? No. I guess whatever he said, that was
all. Did that happen very often? No, just once in a
while, just once in a while. No, I had lots of work to
do. I had to do that. Then I had to count the mine cars
that were dumping each railroad car. Some of them,
you know, they had 60,000 capacity. I was 80,000
capacity. They all definitely come, you know, the
railroad cars. Someone got more capacity than
that. When I had to report so many pit cars in this,
so many pit cars in this, so many pit cars in this,
that the number of the car, of the railroad car, I
had all that responsibility. I see. So you were
pretty much a superintendent then? No, I was
second to the superintendent. Okay. How did, if
you did all this, you, well, and obviously now you
speak English, where did you learn English? Out
here? I never did go to school. You never did? No.
You know, up in them days, we weren't allowed to go
to white school. We weren't allowed even to go to
the steps, because if I walked the steps of a white
school, teacher comes, what do you want here? Go,
you ain't got no business here, get away from here.
They run me away. So I didn't get no education. Did
the Texas Coal Company have a school? No, no,
nobody had a school, no. I understand the Vogel
Mines had a school. No. You don't remember that?
No, they didn't have no school. Now his daughter,
His old man's daughter. Gusta? Gusta. Gusta had
school. We had to pay for it. Oh, I see. We had to pay
her so much for each kid. No, we had daughters. My
daughter had school. Nothing. Well, with Gusta's
school, where was her school? There was a little
house over there. That was what was kept. That was
that. They came over there. And Mrs. Guster had a
little room, a little house over there where she
kept school. And finally, we got this schoolhouse
over here on the right. For the Mexican people?
Yes. And we had a teacher from Cameron. She'd come
here and teach. That was paid by the state. Do you
remember what year that was? Well...
That was after we moved here, must have been in 24, I
guess. Something like that. 1924, I betcha. Well,
before that, in Augusta School, did she service
other coal mine companies? No. Just the Vogel
mine? No. Kids from here went over there. Kids from
the Texas coal company went over to her school.
Yeah, gee, we paid so much. Do you remember how much
you paid? No, I don't remember. I didn't send mine
over there, no. So your children didn't go to
school? Not over there, no. But they did over to
your school? Oh, yeah, you see, that top of the
ridge right over there used to be got burned out. By
the mine from here, that was top of the ridge
school. But no Mexican kids over there, no. That's
about whites. Oh, the Chapel Ridge School was for
whites? Talbert Ridge. Talbert. Talbert.
Talbert. Talbert Ridge. That's white school over
there. I see. But no Mexicans. No, it wasn't
allowed over there at all. But when the buses
started to run, then we all got together. That all,
the Mexicans just went with them. Mr., uh... Uh...
Mr. Phillips' partner, Lucky, Mr. Lucky, Emmett
Lucky. Emmett Lucky? Yeah. Mr. Emmett Lucky was
the trustee, and he kind of got me to go with him. We
went around and take lots of Mexican children to
him. I said, what's the use of this? He said, they go
to school. I said, why? He said, Rockdale. They go
to school in Rockdale. There ain't going to be no
more school outside the country. All of them got to
go to Rockdale. Mine started to go to Rockdale. Do
you remember when that was?
Uh... Vera! Uh-huh?
Do you remember when you started scooting to
Rockdale? Oh,
my God. Let's see, 1920 and 1927. 1927? Yeah. Well,
about twenty-six or twenty-seven. In 1927, you,
uh, the Mexican... Yeah, they got, they went, they
got together then, yes. In Rockdale. In Rockdale.
Now, before that, you had your own school, though.
Well, yeah, we had to pay that, that was in the
Spanish. Spanish school. We had a, yeah. Except
the time that, uh, uh, Mrs. Vogel, Mrs., what was
her name? Augusta. Mrs. Augusta. Yeah, right.
Mrs. Augusta Vogel. She used to teach English. And
there was this teacher came from Calvary City, but
it didn't last long. They had them all go to
Rockdale. They closed up that school over there,
and all of them went to school to Rockdale. Okay,
let me be sure I have this straight, okay,
Augustine. We had a white school over at Talbot.
Talbot Ridge. Talbot Ridge. Uh-huh. And then we
had a Mexican school right up west of here, right?
Yeah, yes. And that was about 1924, you said? Oh,
1925, maybe. And that's the one that the state paid
for? That's the teacher was coming from Denver, I
guess, and the state paid her, yeah. Okay, all
right. And then in 1927, all the students went to
Rockdale. They went to Rockdale, yeah. I see. But
mine is starting to go over there. I see. Did you
have a church at the Texas Coal Company? No, we went
to Rockdale Church. You went to a Rockdale Church?
Catholic Church, yeah. Do you remember the name of
that church? St. Joseph. St. Joseph? Yeah, St.
Joseph. Still St. Joseph. Still go by that name. So
you went there every Sunday? Every Sunday. And, of
course, you went in your buggy. In the buggy. We
used to go in the buggy. And after 19, after 20, we
went in the car. I bought me a Model T. Right. Well,
how did the other families get to church? Did they
walk? Some of them walked. Some of them, I took
them. I'd make three or four, five trips on Sunday.
I used to charge two bits apiece, you know. And I'd
load four. I made a dollar. Yeah. Take them back, a
dollar, bring them back. Yeah. Was church a pretty
strong factor in the mining camps? Well, kind of.
Not too strong, no.
They just went on Sundays then? Yes, on Sundays,
yes, on Sundays. Do you remember any weddings? Oh,
yes, they had a lot of weddings. Did they have them
in Rockdale or did they have them at the mining? At
the camps out here, yeah. Would the preacher or the
minister come out? Yeah, he'd come out and marry,
yes. Like myself, I was married at Texas. You were
married at the Texas Coal Company? At Texas Coal
Company, yes. The priest and the judge came up
there and married. I was married by the judge
first. I got my license, and then our folks wanted
to be married by Catholics, you know. So I had the
priest to come over from Taylor. The priest came
from Taylor to marry us. Did you have to pay for you?
Yes, sure. Do you remember how much you paid him?
No, I think I gave him a $5 bill. Wow, that must have
been a lot of money back then. I gave him a $5. He
didn't charge me. Just give him whatever I wanted
to give him, I'd give him a $5 bill. Did he do the
service in Spanish or was it in English? Spanish.
That was the priest. The judge, Mr. Ed Gunn, was the
judge that married me. He said English. I see.
Where did you meet your wife? Here. At the camp? At
the camp? I had a buddy at the Texas Gold Company.
Was she a daughter of another miner? No, she was a
daughter. She had a mother and two brothers. There
was two sisters and two brothers. They didn't have
a father. I see. They came from Mexico. How did they
end up in the mines? Did their brothers were
working? Yeah, the brothers were working. There
was gold miners. I see. So the family came up
without a father? Yeah. They were with their
brothers. I see. There was an old lady and two girls
and two boys. And the two boys supported the two
daughters and the mother? Yeah, they were
working, yeah. Well, I said boys, that was me and
grown men, but the young men.
Do you ever sit back and think about the old mining
days? No, sir. When you just sit back and think,
what do you think about? I wish I had never seen the
coal mine. Really? I do. But I get to think about my
legs. Of course, I don't like to accident. There's
a lot of times I lose legs and they don't, I don't
want to be in wrecks. That could happen anywhere.
But it might happen while I was working. I was in the
mine. That's why I lost my legs. No, it's all right,
but I would recommend it to, I don't want my kids to
go back under the ground, 100 feet on the ground.
Things got, they all learn trades today. They're
not even thinking about going in the mine. Of
course, they have a new way of mining now, you know.
Yes. One of my boys working away at Alcoa. Alcoa.
That's what he is. But he's working at Alcoa. He's
not by this trip, but... I see. Yeah, they strip the
coal now. But we used to go down the ground and
undermine it. But they don't do that now. No,
Edward, he works at Alcoa. He's a crane operator
over there. I see. Does he live here? Yeah, he lives
in town. In town. Yeah, he lives in town. Did he
remember growing up in mines, around the mines?
No, you remember he was grown up, he was raised
right by the old house, between the end and Texas
Coal Company, about a quarter of a mile back there.
He was raised here. So he wasn't, didn't, doesn't
know very much about the mines. He didn't know
nothing about the mines. Not a thing, no. And you
just assumed to be that way, I guess. Yeah. Yeah, he
don't know nothing about mine. No, sir. You go to
the STV, he says, I don't know. You don't know
anything? He says, it's a hole down in the ground.
He says, that's all.
Yeah, he asked me, how do you take that mule down in
the ground, Dad? I said, they put him in this cage.
We had a sink made, and we settled on that anyway.
And then we pushed that mule, and then he closed the
gate, and somebody sat here on top holding the
bridle. And then I let him down. After downing that
one, he can't do nothing. Did they bring the mules
up every night? Well, some places they did, some
places they'd keep them there till they died. Oh,
really? Yeah, I think that was wrong. We used to
haze them every night. No, we hushed them out every
night, let them down every morning. But after they
went down, they just walked right on that gate.
After the first two, three times, usually I'd push
them. That man just walked, the driver just walked
in that hole by the hauler, and that mule just
walked right behind him. They closed that gate.
Down they go. That's all. How did the miners and
mules even get water down in the mines? They didn't
drink no water. The miners take their jugs of
water. But the mules didn't get no water until they
come out at night. Now they eat no water until when
they come out. Did the mules last pretty long in the
mines? Yes, they lived a long time. Pretty strong
animals. Yes, pretty strong. They get good feed.
Feed them good. Yeah, it's pretty good out.
Well, can you think of anything else that we've
left out? About mining? Yeah, about the mining
camps?
No, they had dances and weddings. They had fights.
They'd get drunk on Saturday nights. They gamble.
Some of them put it quiet. Quiet? Some of them were?
Yeah, quiet. They didn't mess around with the
others. Didn't go to do games or that like that. I
mean, gambling. Yeah. Let me ask you this. Any of
the miners that came up from Mexico, did any of them
return to Mexico? Well, not that I know of. Once
they got here, they stayed here. They stayed here.
Now, we had one here that he was Mr. Silver's number
one man. He's a former now for a while. Then he got to
send him off to Laredo after some hands to hire some
coal diggers. And he got so much confidence in him,
he let him write checks on the Texas Coal Company.
So he went three or four times, and the last time he
never did come back. Oh, no. He wrote a big check,
got the money, and never did come back to Texas
anymore. Just today, he had never been back.
Yeah, Mr. Stevenson says, no, it was Dean. I said,
yes, sir. You know what Joe did? I said, no, Mr.
Stevenson, what? I knew what happened. I said, no,
Mr. Stevenson, what happened, Mr. Stevenson? He
says, that Russell give... I checked for $350, and
he never showed up anymore. He didn't come back at
all no more. I said, what are you going to do about it
now? He said, what can we do? We don't know what
we're about. You try to find out. I said, I will. I
said, hide it there when I want to find out. I never
was in Mexico. I don't know a thing about Mexico. I
never been to Laredo. But what happened to all the
mining families once the mines shut down in the
30s? Oh, they scattered all over the country. Some
ran down in Dallas, some in Fort Worth, some in
Houston. Oh, they went all around. Some in San
Antonio. They just scattered all over the
country. What kind of work were they doing? I don't
know. I don't know. They just left when the mines
shut down. Yeah, they shut down. Some of them went
to Malakoff. To where? Malakoff. Malakoff?
Malakoff, Texas. I see. That's kind of east, I
think, from here somewhere. And that mine closed
up. And they all left there. I had a brother that
worked there a long, long time at Malakoff. And
when they closed down, he went to work for their
house. What that old company name? Big, big
outfit. Shell? No. No? No. Exxon? Texas. Texas,
brother. Texas, yeah. I see. He went to work for
Texaco. And he still, no, he retired now. He
retired this year. He worked 32 years with the
Texaco at Fort Arthur. I see. And he quit this year.
He retired. Is this a friend of yours? My brother.
Your brother? My brother, Jesse. It's just me and
him, just two brothers left. He's the youngest
one. I'm the oldest one. Yeah, me and Jesse's
always left. And they just, he's what? He's a
monocle?